6.828 2018 Lecture 14: Linux ext3 crash recovery

Project reminder
  Choose: Lab 6 (JOS networking) or JOS-related final project of your choice
  Some project ideas in the "Lab 7" writeup
  Projects can be done in groups
  Submit a project proposal this week
  We'll say yes or no -- level of difficulty? relevance to O/S?
  Dec 6: brief write-up due
  Last week: in-class demostrations, check-off with TAs

Lecture plan
  logging for crash recovery
    xv6: slow and immediately durable
    ext3: fast but not immediately durable
  trade-off: performance vs.safety

example problem:
  appending to a file
  two writes:
    mark block non-free in bitmap
    add block # to inode addrs[] array
  we want atomicity: both or neither
  so we cannot do the FS writes one at a time

why logging?
 atomic system calls w.r.t. crashes
 fast recovery (no hour-long fsck)

review of xv6 logging
  [ cache, on-disk log, on-disk FS ]
  each system call is a transaction
  system call updates cached blocks, in memory
  at end of system call:
    write modified blocks to log on disk
    write block #s and "done" to log on disk -- the commit point
    install modified blocks in FS on disk
      if we crash midway-through, recovery can replay all writes from log
      rule: don't start FS writes until all writes committed in log
            i.e. all or nothing -- atomic
    erase "done" from log on disk
      so logged blocks from next xaction don't appear committed

homework
   echo hi > a
   commit() hacked to ignore one of the writes, crash after commit+install
   and recovery disabled
   Q: why does "cat a" (after crash) produce "panic: ilock: no type"?
      broken commit() updated directory entry but not i-node
      so dirent is on disk and contains the inode#
      but the i-node is marked as free (type=0)
   Q: after recovery, why does "cat a" produce an empty file?
      even though we ran "echo hi > a"?
      recovery wrote inode to the right place
        it is now allocated, and dirent is valid
      but create and write are separate system calls and transactions
        echo never called write() -- crash during file create

what's wrong with xv6's logging? it is slow!
  immediate commit, after every syscall
  immediate write to FS after commit
    must do this in order to re-use on-disk log -- i.e. to run the next syscall
  all new syscalls block during any commit()
    so not much concurrent execution if multiple processes
  every block written twice to disk, once to log, once to FS
    not so bad for meta-data blocks
    painful for big files
  so:
    these writes are synchronous -- xv6 waits for each to complete before proceeding
    creating an empty file takes 6 synchronous disk writes -- 60 ms
    so only 10 or 20 disk update system calls per second

Linux's ext3 design
 case study of the details required to add logging to a file system
 Stephen Tweedie 2000 talk transcript "EXT3, Journaling Filesystem"
   http://olstrans.sourceforge.net/release/OLS2000-ext3/OLS2000-ext3.html
 ext3 adds a log to ext2, a previous log-less file system
 has many modes, I'll start with "journaled data"
   log contains both metadata and file content blocks

ext3 structures:
  in memory:
    write-back block cache
    per-transaction info:
      set of block #s to be logged
      set of outstanding "handles" -- one per syscall
  on disk:
    FS
    circular log

what's in the ext3 log?
 log superblock: log offset and starting seq # of earliest valid transaction
   (this is not the FS superblock; it's a block at start of log file)
 descriptor blocks: magic, seq, block #s
 data blocks (as described by descriptor)
 commit blocks: magic, seq
 |super: offset+seq #| ... |Descriptor 4|...blocks...|Commit 4| |Descriptor 5|... 

how does ext3 get good performance?
  batching
    commits every few seconds, not after every system call
    so each transaction includes many syscalls
  why does batching help performance?
    1. amortize fixed transaction cost (descriptor and data blocks) over many transactions
    2. "write absorbtion"
       many syscalls in the batch may modify the same block (i-node, bitmap, dirent)
       thus one disk write for many syscalls' updates
    3. better concurrency -- less waiting for previous syscall to finish commit

note: system calls return before they are safely on the disk
  this affects application-level crash recovery situation
  e.g. mail server that receives message, writes to disk, then replies "OK"

ext3 allows concurrent transactions and syscalls
  there may be multiple transactions:
    some fully committed in the on-disk log
    some doing the log writes as part of commit
    *one* "open" transaction that's accepting new syscalls 

ext3 sys call code:
  sys_open() {
    h = start()
    get(h, block #)
    modify the block in the cache
    stop(h)
  }
  start():
    tells logging system to make set of writes until stop() atomic
    logging system must know the set of outstanding system calls
      can't commit until they are all complete
    start() can block this sys call if needed
  get():
    tells logging system we'll modify cached block
      added to list of blocks to be logged
    prevent writing block to disk until after xaction commits
  stop():
    stop() does *not* cause a commit
    transaction can commit iff all included syscalls have called stop()

committing a transaction to disk
  1. block new syscalls
  2. wait for in-progress syscalls to stop()
  3. open a new transaction, unblock new syscalls
  4. write descriptor to log on disk w/ list of block #s
  5. write each block from cache to log on disk
  6. wait for all log writes to finish
  7. write the commit record
  8. wait for the commit write to finish
  9. now cached blocks allowed to go to homes on disk (but not forced)

can syscall B read uncommitted results of syscall A?
  A: rm x
  B: echo > y -- re-using x's freed i-node
  could B commit first, so that crash would reveal anomaly?
  case 1: both in same xaction -- ok, both or neither
  case 2: A in T1, B in T2 -- ok, ext3 commits transactions in order
  case 3: B in T1, A in T2
    in T1: |--B--|
    in T2:    |--A--|
    could B see A's free of y's i-node?
      after all, A writes the same cache that B reads
      bad: crash after T1 could leave both x and y using the i-node
    no: ext3 waits for all syscalls in prev xaction to finish
      before letting any in next start
      thus B (in T1) completes before ext3 lets A (in T2) start
      so B won't see any of A's writes
      thus:
        T1: |-syscalls-|
        T2:            |-syscalls-|
        T3:                       |-syscalls-|
  the larger point:
    the commit order must be consistent with the order in which
      the system calls read/wrote state.
    perhaps ext3 sacrifices a bit of performance here to gain correctness.

is it safe for a syscall in T2 to write a block that was also written in T1?
  ext3 allows T2 to start before T1 finishes committing -- can take a while
    T1: |-syscalls-|-commitWrites-|
    T2:            |-syscalls-|-commitWrites-|
  the danger:
    a T1 syscall writes block 17
    T1 closes, starts writing cached blocks to log
    T2 starts, a T2 syscall also writes block 17
    could T1 write T2's modified block 17 to the T1 transaction in the log?
    bad: not atomic, since then a crash would leave some but not all off T2's writes committed
  so:
    ext3 gives T1 a private copy of the block cache as it existed when T1 closed
    T1 commits from this snapshot of the cache
    it's efficient using copy-on-write
    the copies allow syscalls in T2 to proceed while T1 is committing
  the point:
    correctness requires a post-crash+recover state as if syscalls
      had executed atomically and sequentially
    ext3 uses various tricks to allow some concurrency

when can ext3 re-use transaction T1's log space?
  (log is circular)
  once:
    all transactions prior to T1 have been freed in the log, and
    T1's cached blocks have all been written to FS on disk
  free == advance log superblock's start pointer/seq

what if not enough free space in log for a syscall?
  suppose we start adding syscall's blocks to T2
  half way through, realize T2 won't fit on disk
  we cannot commit T2, since syscall not done
  we cannot back out of this syscall, either
    there's no way to undo a syscall
    other syscalls in T2 may have read its modifications

solution: reservations
  syscall pre-declares how many block of log space it might need
  ext3's start() blocks the syscall until enough free space
  may need to commit open transaction, then free older transaction
    OK since reservations mean all started sys calls can complete + commit

performance?
  rm * in a directory with 100 files
  xv6: over 10 seconds -- six synchrounous disk writes per sys call
  ext3: about 20 ms total
  rm * repeatedly writes the same same direntry and inode blocks
    until commit, just updating the cached blocks, no disk writes
  then one commit of a few metadata blocks
  how long to do a commit?
    log a handful of blocks (inodes, dirents)
    wait for disk to say writes are on disk
    then write the commit record
    two rotations, or about 20ms total
    modern disk interfaces can avoid wasted revolution

what if a crash?
  crash may interrupt writing last xaction to log on disk
  so disk may have a bunch of complete xactions, then maybe one partial
  may also have written some of block cache to disk
    but only for fully committed xactions, not partial last one

how does recovery work
  1. find the start of the log -- the first non-freed descriptor
     log "superblock" contains offset and seq# of first transaction
     (advanced when log space is freed)
  2. find the end of the log
     scan until bad magic or not the expected seq #
     go back to last commit record
     crash during commit -> no commit record, recovery ignores
  3. replay all blocks through last complete xaction, in log order

what if block after last valid log block looks like a log descriptor?
  perhaps a descriptor block left over from previous use of log?
    seq # will be too low
  perhaps some file data happens to look like a descriptor?
    logged data block cannot contain the magic number!
    ext3 forbids magic number in logged data blocks -> flags in descriptor

"ordered data" mode (so far we've been talking about "journaled data" mode)
  logging file content is slow, every data block written twice
  can we entirely omit file content from the log?
  if we did, when would we write file content to the FS?
  can we write file content blocks at any time at all?
    no: if metadata committed first, crash may leave file pointing
        to unwritten blocks with someone else's data
  ext3 "ordered data" mode:
    don't write file content to the log
    write content blocks to disk *before* commiting inode w/ new size and block #
  if no crash, there's no problem -- readers will see the written data
  if crash before commit:
    [diagram: i-node and bitmap and new data in memory, new data on disk too,
              but on-disk i-node and bitmap not updated]
    block has new data
    perhaps not visible, since i-node size and block list not updated
    no metadata inconsistencies
      i-node and free bitmap writes are still atomic
  most people use ext3 ordered mode

correctness challenges w/ ordered mode:
  A. rmdir, re-use block for write() to some file,
       crash before rmdir or write committed
     after recovery, as if rmdir never happened,
       but directory block has been overwritten!
     fix: no re-use of freed block until freeing syscall committed
  B. rmdir, commit, re-use block in file, ordered file write, commit,
       crash+recover, replay rmdir
     file is left w/ directory content e.g. . and ..
       since file content write is not replayed
     fix: put "revoke" records into log, prevent log replay of a given block
  note: both problems due to changing the type of a block (content vs meta-data)
    so another solution might be to never do that
	 
Summary of rules
  The classic write-ahead logging rule:
    Don't write meta-data block to on-disk FS until committed in on-disk log
  Wait for all syscalls in T1 to finish before starting T2
  Don't overwrite a block in buffer cache before it is in the log
  Don't free log space until all blocks have been written to FS
  Ordered mode:
    Write datablock to FS before commit
    Don't reuse free block until freeing syscall is committed
    Don't replay revoked syscalls

another corner case: open fd and unlink
  open a file, then unlink it
  unlink commits
  file is open, so unlink removes dir entry but doesn't free blocks
  crash
  nothing interesting in log to replay
  inode and blocks not on free list, also not reachably by any name
    will never be freed! oops
  solution: add inode to linked list starting from FS superblock
    commit that along with remove of dir ent
  recovery looks at that list, completes deletions

checksums
  recall: transaction's log blocks must be on disk before writing commit block
    ext3 waits for disk to say "done" before starting commit block write
  risk: disks usually have write caches and re-order writes, for performance
    sometimes hard to turn off (the disk lies)
    people often leave re-ordering enabled for speed, out of ignorance
    bad news if disk writes commit block before the rest of the transaction
  solution: commit block contains checksum of all data blocks
    on recovery: compute checksum of datablocks
	if matches checksum in commit block: install transaction
    if no match: don't install transaction
  ext4 has log checksumming
  
does ext3 fix the xv6 log performance problems?
  synchronous write to on-disk log -- yes, but 5-second window
  tiny update -> whole block write -- maybe (if syscalls permit write absorbtion)
  synchronous writes to home locations after commit -- yes
  ext3/ext4 very successful!
