6.828 2018 L16: Operating System Organization

Topic: what should a kernel do?
  What kinds of system calls should it support?
  What abstractions should it provide?

These depend on the application, and on programmer taste!
  There is no single best answer
  But plenty of ideas, opinions, and debates
    We'll see some in the papers over the rest of the term
  This topic is more about ideas and less about specific mechanisms

The traditional approach
  1) big abstractions, and
  2) a "monolithic" kernel implementation
  UNIX, Linux, xv6

Example: traditional treatment of CPU
  kernel gives each process its own "virtual" CPU -- not shared
  implications:
    interrupts must save/restore all registers for transparency
    timer interrupts force transparent context switches
  maybe good: simple, many irritating details abstracted away
  maybe bad: much is hidden, e.g. scheduling; might be slow

Example: traditional treatment of memory
  each process has its own private address space, looks like RAM
  maybe good:
    no need to worry about other process's use of memory
    no need to worry about security, since private
    kernel has great freedom to play clever virtual memory tricks
  maybe bad:
    limited scope for application-level VM tricks, as in Appel+Li

Clever virtual memory tricks played by traditional kernels:
  lazy page table fill -- fast start-up for big allocations
  copy-on-write fork() (like Lab 4 but hidden in the kernel)
  demand paging:
    process bigger than available physical memory?
    "page-out" (write) pages to disk, mark PTEs invalid
    if process tries to use one of those pages, MMU causes page fault
      kern finds phys mem, page-in from disk, mark PTE valid
      then return to process -- transparent
    this works because apps use only a fraction of mem at a given time
  shared physical memory for executables and libraries
  zero-copy I/O by sharing block buffers between user and kernel

The philosophy behind traditional kernels is abstraction:
  portable interfaces
    files, not disk controller registers
    address spaces, not MMU access
  simple interfaces, hidden complexity
    all I/O via FDs and read/write, not specialized for each device &c
    address spaces with transparent disk paging
  abstractions help the kernel manage resources
    process abstraction lets kernel be in charge of scheduling
    file/directory abstraction lets kernel be in charge of disk layout
  abstractions help the kernel enforce security
    file permissions
    processes with private address spaces
  lots of indirection
    e.g. FDs, virtual addresses, file names, PIDs
    helps kernel virtualize, hide, revoke, schedule, &c

Abstractions are a win for app developer convenience
  app developers want to spend time building new application features
  they want the O/S to deal with everything else
  so they want power and portability and reasonable speed

Traditional kernels are "monolithic"
  kernel is one big program, like xv6
  easy for sub-systems to cooperate -- no irritating boundaries
    e.g. integrated paging and file system cache
  all code runs with high privilege -- no internal security restrictions

What's wrong with traditional kernels?
  big => complex, buggy, unreliable (in principle, not so much in practice)
  abstractions may be over-general and thus slow
    maybe I don't need all my registers saved on a context switch
  abstractions are sometimes not quite right
    maybe I want to wait for a process that's not my child
  abstractions can hinder app-level optimizations
    DB may be better at laying out B-Tree files on disk than kernel FS

Microkernels -- an alternate approach
  big idea: move most O/S functionality to user-space service processes
  kernel can be small, mostly IPC
  [diagram: h/w, kernel, services (FS VM net), apps]
  the hope:
    simple kernel can be fast and reliable
    services are easier to replace and customize
  Examples: Mach 3, L3
  JOS is a mix of micro-kernel and exokernel

Microkernel wins:
  you really can make IPC fast
  separate services force kernel developers to think about modularity
  good IPC is great for new user-level services, e.g. X server

Microkernel losses:
  kernel can't be tiny: needs to know about processes and memory
  you may need lots of IPCs, slow in aggregate
  it's hard to split the kernel into lots of service processes!
    and it makes cross-service optimization harder
    so server processes tend to be big, not a huge win

Microkernels have seen some success
  IPC/service idea widely used in e.g. OSX
    but not much for traditionional kernel services
    mostly for (lots of) new services, designed to be client/server
  some embedded O/Ses have strong microkernel flavor

Exokernel (1995)

the paper:
  O/S community paid lots of attention
  full of interesting ideas
  describes an early research prototype
  later SOSP 1997 paper realizes more of the vision

Exokernel overview
  philosophy: eliminate all abstractions
    expose h/w, let app do what it wants
  [ h/w, kernel, environments, libOSes ]
  an exokernel would not provide address space, pipes, file system, TCP
  instead, let apps use MMU, phys mem, NIC, timer interrupts
    not portable -- but lots of app control
  per-app libOS implements abstractions
    perhaps POSIX address spaces, fork, file system, TCP, &c
    each app can have its own custom libOS and its own abstractions
  why?
    kernel may be faster due to streamlining, simplicity
    apps may be faster b/c they can customize libOS

Exokernel challenges:
  what resources to expose to libOSes?
    what kernel API needed to implement copy-on-write fork at user level?
  can libOSes share? securely?
    e.g. compiler reading editor's files
    can we have sharing+security without big kernel abstractions?
  will enough apps benefit from custom libOSes?

Exokernel memory interface
  what are the resources?
    kernel exposes physical pages and VA->PA MMU mappings
  what's the app->kernel API?
    pa = AllocPage()
    TLBwr(va, pa)
    Grant(env, pa)  -- to share memory
    DeallocPage(pa)
  and these kernel->app upcalls:
    PageFault(va)
    PleaseReleaseMemory()
  what does exokernel need to do?
    track what env owns what phys pages
    ensure app only creates mappings to phys pages it owns
    decide which app to ask to give up a phys page when system runs out
      that app gets to decide which of its pages

typical use of VM calls
  application wants memory for a 100MB sparse array, lazily allocated
    not unlike the mmap() homework
  PageFault(va):
    if va in range:
      if va in table:
        TLBwr(va, table[va])
      else:
        pa = AllocPage()
        table[va] = pa
        TLBwr(va, pa)
      jump to faulting PC

A cool thing you could do w/ exokernel-style memory
  databases like to keep a cache of disk pages in memory
  problem on traditional OS:
    assume an OS with demand-paging to/from disk
    if DB caches some data, and OS needs a phys page,
      OS may page-out a DB page holding a cached disk block
    but that's a waste of time: if DB knew, it could release phys
      page w/o writing, and later read it back from DB file (not paging area)
  1. exokernel needs phys mem for some other app
  2. exokernel sends DB a PleaseReleaseMemory() upcall
  3. DB picks a clean page, calls DeallocPage(pa)
  4. OR DB picks dirty page, saves to DB file, then DeallocPage(pa)
    
Exokernel CPU interface
  *not* transparent process switching; instead:
    kernel upcall to app when it gives CPU to app
    kernel upcall to app when it is taking away CPU
    (these are upcalls to fixed app locations, not transparent)
  so if app is running and timer interrupt causes end of slice
    [diagram]
    CPU interrupts from app into kernel
    kernel jumps back into app at "please yield" upcall
    app saves registers
    app calls Yield()
  when kernel decides to resume app
    kernel jumps into app at "resume" upcall
    app restores saved registers
  exokernel does not need to save/restore user registers (except PC)
    this makes syscall/trap/contextswitch fast

A cool thing an app can do with exokernel CPU management
  suppose time slice ends in the middle of
    acquire(lock);
    ...
    release(lock);
  you don't want the app to hold the lock despite not running!
    then maybe other apps can't make forward progress
  so the "please yield" upcall can first complete the critical section

Fast IPC
  IPC on traditional kernel
    pipes (or sockets)
    a message / communication abstraction
    picture: two buffers in kernel
    slow:
      write+read + read+write -- 8 crossings
      8 crossings (w/ register save/restore)
      two blocking calls
  IPC on Aegis kernel
    Yield() can take a target process argument
      kernel up-calls into the target
      almost a direct jump to an instruction in target process
      kernel allows only entry at approved locations in target
    kernel leaves regs alone, so can contain arguments + return value
    target app uses Yield() to return
    fast: only 4 crossings, much less save/restore, no blocking read()
  note IPC execution just appears in the target!
    *not* a return from read() or ipc_recv()

summary of low-level performance ideas
  mostly about fast system calls, traps, and upcalls
    system call speed can be very important!
    slowness encourages complex system calls, discourages frequent calls
  trap path doesn't save most registers
  fast upcalls to user space (no need for kern to restore regs)
  protected call for IPC (just jump to known address; no pipe or send/recv)
  map some kernel structures into user space (pg tbl, reg save, ...)

bigger ideas -- mostly about abstractions
  custom abstractions are a win for performance
    apps need low-level operations for this to work
  much of kernel can be implemented at user-level
    while preserving sharing and security
    very surprising
  protection does *not* require kernel to implement big abstractions
    e.g. can protect process pages w/o kernel managing address spaces
    1997 paper develops this fully for file systems
  address space abstraction can be decomposed
    into phys page allocation and va->pa mappings

what happened to the exokernel?
  people don't use exokernels
  but...

first, a word about expectations
  Exokernel was a research project
  research success takes the form of influence
    change how people think
    help them see new possibilities
    perhaps they'll borrow a few ideas
  research success is not the same as having lots of users!
    it's rare for research to turn into products
    even if the research is good

lasting influence from the exokernel:
  UNIX gives much more low-level control than it did in 1995
    very important for some applications
  people think a lot about kernel extensibility now, e.g. kernel modules
  library operating systems are often used, e.g. in unikernels
