6.828 2018 Lecture 22: O/S Network Performance, IX

*** please fill out a course evaluation!
    http://web.mit.edu/subjectevaluation/

Reading: IX: A Protected Dataplane Operating System for
         High Throughput and Low Latency, OSDI 2014

this lecture
  O/S network stack performance
  IX as case study

Linux network software structure
  [diagram]
  queue: NIC DMA
  processing: driver interrupt 
  queue: input queue
  processing: TCP (or UDP, ICMP, NFS, &c)
  queue: socket buffer (store until app wants to read)
  processing: application read()

note a few things:
  in-kernel to get access to NIC hardware
  in-kernel to de-multiplex, e.g. ARP vs TCP
  in-kernel to prevent one app from messing with another app's connections
  lots of locks and inter-core sharing, e.g. queues, TCP connection state

how does network software structure affect performance?

let's focus on high-performance network servers
  e.g. memcached, an in-memory key/value storage server
  high request rate
  short requests / responses
  lots of clients, lots of potential parallelism
  want high throughput under high load (requests per second)
  want low latency under low/modest load (seconds per request)
  want low tail of latency distribution

what are the relevant h/w limits?
  i.e. what can we hope for?

throughput limits:
  10 gigabit ethernet: 15 million tiny packets/second
  40 gigabit ethernet: 60 million tiny packets/second
  RAM: a few gigabytes per second
  interrupts: a million per second
  system calls: a few million per second
  contended locks: a million per second
  inter-core data movement: a few million per second
  so:
    if limited by ethernet and RAM, ~10 million/sec short queries
    if limited by interrupts, locks, &c: ~1 million/sec (maybe per core)

latency ingredients:
  latency important for e.g. web page with 100s of items
  low load: sum of a sequence of steps
    network speed-of-light and switch round-trip time
    interrupt
    queue operations
    sleep/wakeup
    system calls
    inter-core data movement
    RAM fetches
  high load:
    latency is largely determined by wait time -- queuing
    efficiency (high throughput) reduces queuing time
    bursty arrivals increase queuing time
    bursty service times increase queuing time
    structural problems can increase queuing time
      load imbalance, or no-one serving a queue
  latency is hard to reason about, hard to improve

IX: a design for a high-performance network stack
  OSDI 2014
  lives in Linux
  different syscall API (doesn't preserve Linux API)
  different stack architecture (doesn't use Linux stack code or design)

IX diagram -- Figure 1(a)
  Linux kernel
  IX kernel
     NIC DMA queues
     TCP/IP stack
  IX application
     multiple threads

IX notes
  IX runs in VMX non-root (guest) mode using Dune
  IX kernel at CPL=0
  IX application at CPL=3
  Linux kernel gives IX dedicated NIC queues and dedicated cores
    then Linux isn't involved much
  IX application makes system calls to IX kernel
    mostly to send and receive packets
  packet buffers in memory shared between IX kernel and IX application
    so packet data isn't copied (unlike Linux)

idea: batching syscall interface
  the problem:
    syscall overhead is big if messages are small
    want to send/recv more packets/second than one can do syscalls/second
  the solution: run_io() (Section 4.3)
    run_io() argument describes many writes to many TCP connections
    run_io() return describes incoming data on many TCP connections
    (really more general, e.g. returns new connection events too)
    so: each user/kernel crossing does lots of work
  while True:
    run_io(out, in)
    for msg in in:
      process msg
      out.append(reply)

idea: run-to-completion -- Figure 1(b)
  the problem:
    Linux uses CPU time moving packets through stages and queues
    queues:
      good if application is doing something else
      bad for network performance (locks, core-to-core, cache eviction)
  what is "run-to-completion"?
    complete the processing of one batch of inputs before starting on next batch
    really complete: driver, TCP, application, enqueue reply
  how?
    run_io(), function call down to driver, return pkt all the way up to app
    app calls next run_io() with reply message
  why?
    single thread carries the batch of packets through all steps
    avoids queues, sleep/wakeup, context switch, inter-core xfers
    helps keep active packet batch in the CPU data cache (vs long queues)
    avoids worries about balancing processing rate in each stage
 
idea: polling rather than interrupts
  the problem:
    interrupts are expensive
    interrupts are redundant if always likely to be input waiting
  what is polling?
    periodically check NIC DMA queues for new input
    and disable NIC interrupts
  why hard?
    where to put the checks? i.e. in what loop?
    might check too often -- waste CPU
    might check too rarely -- high latency, queue overflow
  IX's solution:
    each core dedicated to one application thread
      while(1) { run_io(); ... }
    run_io() polls NIC DMA queues
    no waste: if no input, nothing for the core to do anyway
    if input, grabs a batch and returns it to application
    automatically polls more frequently at low load, less at high load
      very nice; paper calls this "adaptive polling"

what about multi-core parallelism?
  the problem:
    one core often can't deliver enough throughput
    will leave most of 10-gigabit ethernet idle
  the opportunity:
    lots of clients
    work for each client is often independent
    all modern machines have multiple cores
  the dangers:
    lock contention is expensive
    data movement (between cores) is expensive
  to avoid data movement and lock contention:
    all actions for a client, TCP, and packet should be on same core
    no data should be used on more than one core
  examples of potentially shared data:
    packet content
    NIC queues
    packet free lists
    TCP data structures
    application data (e.g. memcached's in-memory DB)

idea: multiple NIC queues for parallelism
  modern NICs support many independent DMA queues
    NIC uses filters and hashing to pick the queue
  Linux sets up a separate set of NIC DMA queues per IX application
    one queue per core for each IX application
    Linux tells NIC a filter for each IX application
  NIC hashes client IP addr / port to pick the queue for each incoming packet
    "flow-consistent hashing" or "receive-side scaling" (RSS)
    NIC gives all packets for a given TCP connection to the same core!
    no need to share TCP connection state among cores
    no need to move packet data between cores
  run_io() looks at NIC DMA queue for just its own core
  a new connection is given to the core determined by the NIC's hash
    hopefully uniform and results in balanced load

idea: zero copy
  how to avoid IX/user and user/IX copies of TCP data?
    across the CPL=0/CPL=3 boundary (like user/kernel)
    40 gigabits/sec may stress RAM throughput
  IX uses page table to map packet buffers into both IX and application
    NIC DMAs to/from this memory
    run_io() carries pointers into this memory
  app/IX cooperate to note when received/sent buffer is free
    freed buffers reported via run_io()

IX design limitations
  assumes many parallel clients making small requests
    you'd want something else for a single 40-megabit/second transfer
  assumes good load balance across cores
    i.e. clients and requests evenly divided by NIC onto queues
    i.e. requests all take about the same amount of time
    could re-assign flows to NIC queues?
    could steal work from other cores?
  assumes non-blocking request handling
    i.e. service code computes and then replies
    does not read the disk, send an RPC and wait, &c
    b/c blocking would produce an idle core and a rapidly-growing queue
    could shift block requests to a dedicated thread/core?

Evaluation
  what should we look for?
  high throughput under high load -- especially for small messages
  low latency under light load
  throughput proportional of # of cores

Figure 2
  looks at latency under light load
  one client, ping-pong, one request outstanding at a time
  x-axis is message size
  y-axis is throughput (gigabits/second)
  why does the line rise with increasing message size?
    lots of fixed overheads amortized over increasing data
    increased opportunity for batching, since many packets/message
    rtt, TCP/IP header, interrupts (for Linux), syscalls, TCP processing
  what limits the rise? 
    10-gigabit ethernet minus headers
  why does IX beat Linux?
    for small messages (e.g. 64 bytes):
      latency-limited
      IX polling sees the message sooner
      IX has no interrupt/queueing/sleep/wakeup
      fewer user/kernel crossings
      paper says 5.7 us for IX 64-byte; 24 us for Linux
        this is enough for people to care!
    for big messages:
      throughput-limited
      IX has less advantage here, since most wins are per-packet
      IX's zero-copy might be important

Figure 3(a)
  effect of adding cores on throughput
  ideally: throughput increases with core count
    until we hit the 10- or 40-megabit/second ethernet limit
    note this does *not* show that the software is efficient
      only that it gets good parallel speedup
  18 clients, 64-byte messages, one per connection
  x-axis is number of cores
  y-axis is RPCs/second in millions
  why do the lines go up (at least at start)?
    work is split over more parallel cores
    18 clients, so perhaps up to 18 cores could be used
  is the throughput proportional to the number of cores?
    probably "yes" for all lines, at start
    so locking &c are not eliminating all parallelism
  note half a million / second for IX with one core
    that's 2 microseconds of CPU time per request/response
    or about 4000 CPU cycles
  why does IX 10 gigabit line level off?
  why does IX beat Linux?
    polling, batched system calls, run to completion
  it's impressive that IX still scales linearly at 4 million/sec
    that's a very high number for any system!
    it suggests that parallelization is nearly perfect
      RSS helps
      s/w must have absolutely no locks, no inter-core data movement

IX makes some big architectural decisions differently
  per-application network stack
    rather than single stack shared by all applications
    allows packet buffers to be shared, so zero-copy
  dedicates cores to applications, and to application threads
    rather than shared cores, multiplexed by the kernel
    allows polling and run-to-completion
    helps make the software more efficient, simpler
    requires plentiful cores
  dedicates NIC queues to application
    rather than shared queues, de-multiplexed by the kernel
    more direct access, for better efficiency
    requires plentiful NIC queues
